I'm a father to [music] two beautiful
daughters.
>> I'm also a husband, a son, a cyclist,
a citizen.
>> I should try that.
>> Despite ever growing challenges,
>> this is supposed to be sand. It is
[music] slimy. It smells like
>> Oh, I got a fart.
I have two grandkids and I'm very
concerned about their future.
>> I believe we can protect each other,
>> our planet,
[music]
don't drop him.
>> Our homes,
>> our futures. is about taking our water.
>> I believe in the power of community.
I'm Nikolai Costa Waldo and this is an
optimist's guide to the planet.
I'm from Denmark, a country made up of
more than 400 islands. U is one [music]
of those islands.
It's the place where me and my family go
to recharge and reconnect.
Where are [music] we right now?
>> We are in our summer house. Me and Nuga
lived in this small apartment in
Copenhagen when [music] she was pregnant
with Philippa
and we wanted to have a place that was
not in the city. So we we found [music]
this. We're very happy here.
>> Was that a joke?
>> What do you call dad jokes?
>> Dad mom jokes.
Nug was just talking about your new lady
interest.
>> No, but it's it's I'm so happy because
then I don't have to answer all your
stupid questions.
>> Now you have Thank you, Gia.
>> This season we're joined by Gaia.
>> Yeah, I am an AI assistant. The
producers named me after the ancient
Earth goddess.
>> Hey, Gia.
>> No interesting questions. I'm sorry.
>> I hope that you'll travel with me around
the world on this season two of the
Optimus Guide to the Planet. I I need
the encouragement. I'm with you all the
way, Nikolai. We'll tackle every
challenge and find those bright spots
together.
>> When [music] things looks a bit dark in
the world,
you look around and see how many people
are making a difference and trying to
make a difference.
[music] You cannot let your fear make
your choices otherwise you won't be
optimistic, right?
Oh, thank you.
>> Yoohoo. It's working. [music] Yeah.
[music]
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Lukak has been known as the cow
whisperer,
>> but I don't speak their dialect yet.
>> But she will.
How important has this place been to
your family?
>> Very important, I think, because this is
a place where you never argue.
Just calm down.
>> Yeah.
>> We don't do it.
>> No. No. No.
>> Has the world changed since we did the
last show? I think that that um if you
just follow the the main news to just
get get this uh this constant doomsday
barrage and to be honest I did in I've
had moments where I was like the you
know an optimist guide to the planet
because nobody's optimistic all the
time. The alternative is that you go
well we're doomed. There's nothing we
can do. We might as well give up and and
and we we're not going to give up. We
have we have kids and we hope to have
grandkids. We're so lucky to experience
life and we want to take care of it. We
want to pass it on.
[music]
Even in a place as wonderful as a
sometimes the best of intentions can
[music] have negative consequences.
Denmark is a global [music] farming
powerhouse.
For centuries, we've cut down forests
and drained wetlands, transforming 60%
of our land into farmland.
But fertilizer runoff from the
agriculture that sustains [music] us is
slowly destroying the coastal waters we
love.
[music] I'm meeting a photojournalist
who's investigated this critical issue.
>> [laughter]
>> Okay. Hi.
>> You're a journalist.
>> I'm a journalist, a photojournalist.
Yeah. In in my spare time, I free dive.
I have a sailboat. I fish. I I'm a
well-worn user of the Danish uh water.
On the surface, it looks fantastic. It
looks uh like the nationals
old paintings of of Denmark with the
forest and and hills and all this. Uh
but as soon as you go down to the water,
there's nothing there. I went there and
took a dive and and saw for myself it's
a desert bit beneath the surface.
>> Why don't we uh go out and have a look?
>> Yeah, sure.
>> Let's suit up.
Have you noticed any difference in in
the fishing?
>> 30 years ago, I could say like I wanted
to invite 20 people to eat fish
>> and then I'll go out and kiss them and I
have the fish for them. You can't do
that anymore. I have two grandkids and
I'm very concerned about their future. I
think maybe they will look in the story
book someday and say, "Oh, that was the
time they were fishing the water."
>> Yeah.
>> That's
>> How many time have you gone down here?
>> Uh, never in this area. So, I'm curious
to see uh see how it looks to be honest.
diving in with Asuka. I have to admit,
I'm hoping that the fact that he hasn't
dived here before might mean that the
waters around UI aren't as bad as other
parts of Denmark.
But they are.
[music]
It's heartbreaking.
>> This is like a
As you see, like muddy, slimy. You can
smell it. It smells like
>> Oh my gosh.
>> fart.
And
>> there's absolutely nothing in there.
It's just
>> This is supposed to be sand.
But the entire bottom is is like this.
It's dead algae. When all the nutritions
from the farming come to the water, lots
of algae grow. When they die, they go on
the bottom and become this. So basically
all the surface of the bottom is covered
with dead algaes
>> and when they die they just suck out all
the the oxygen in the waters.
>> Yeah.
>> This is the result of intensive
>> farming.
>> Farming.
>> Yeah.
>> Nitrogen and phosphorus from from the
fields.
>> So there's no fish, nothing down there.
Just one big dead bottom with with this
In 10 years, these dead zones have
doubled in size, covering,300 [music]
square miles.
That's almost 10% of the size of all of
Denmark.
2 years ago, as soon as I I [music] got
an idea of how big this is, I uh
convinced my editors into doing this
[music] for a year.
>> And this was what you photographed all
over Denmark?
>> All over Denmark. It's disgusting.
>> This is just This is not okay.
[music]
>> We were very nervous that this project
wouldn't be read, that it wouldn't be
viewed cuz uh climate journalism,
environmental journalism is something
that's is pretty difficult to to get
people to attention point uh towards.
These pictures were shown in all uh
major news outlets and TV shows and uh
and it became a huge debate.
It exploded. I guess it went viral.
>> It's something that's fundamentally
changing the way that people are looking
upon the the the country of Denmark.
>> ASCA's photojournalism was a wakeup
call. We were all horrified and demanded
a political reaction. And a broad
coalition of young and old, left and
right, fishermen and farmers, found
creative ways to ask our decision makers
to step up
to protect our inner [music] waters.
We're in Kobe, which is uh it's the
capital of this uh municipality. And is
this the boat
>> in Halbeck? Local teens can sign up and
join a free program to learn about
sailing and marine life.
>> Hello to meet you. Hi.
>> Nice to meet you. Who are all these
people? Hello.
>> Hi.
>> Here they get to meet biologists,
sailors, and politicians.
>> Okay.
We go fast.
>> Okay. Come on.
>> This is really hard work.
>> Yes.
Wow, this is beautiful.
>> I've learned about like how bad it
actually is when you look down under the
water. It's all like gooey kind of
>> uh
>> it's just like looks like a bunch of
>> How important is um the health the
climate of of the waters here? is very
important for like the whole climate
because if the ocean's messed up then
all of our water like everything goes
back to the ocean. Yeah.
>> So it's like big cycle of just messed up
things.
>> Yeah.
>> And we don't want that.
>> Do you believe in in our system and now
that the politician will listen to
>> to us?
>> So I will never be like 100% trusting of
our system because we can't make a
perfect system but we can make one
that's good.
>> Make it better. make it better.
>> On board today is the federal minister
of a brand new ministry entirely focused
on the environment.
>> But we have this problem with the oxygen
depletion. We have to do something about
the inner waters in Denmark.
>> 70% of the cause for low oxygen in our
waters is due to too much nitrogen from
the farmlands.
>> For too many years too little have
happened. Obviously extremely difficult
coming back to
>> the the farmers need to to take out the
farmlands that are polluting our floors
and seas.
>> Sure.
>> And also change the way they are
farming.
>> I need to run again.
>> You have to run. Don't [laughter] work.
>> Because for too many years there's been
a fight between farmers and nature
people and you know not being able to
sit together really and solve this.
It's not very delicious.
>> Well, this is a very perfect way of of
showing, well,
this is the problem.
>> Yeah, this is the problem.
>> In 2024,
years of campaigning finally paid off. A
historic land reform was signed.
farmers, politicians, conservationists,
Danes came together and decided to act
for our common good to act today for a
better tomorrow.
>> So over the next 20 years,
>> we'll take up approximately 15% of our
farmlands back to nature.
>> We have the ambition of planting 1
billion trees. We did this huge green
deal together with the farmers, together
with the nature organization.
>> This is not a band-aid. This is a this
is a real
>> intent of a solution.
>> You know, it's a real movement
>> creating for the first time a real
change.
>> It was also answering for the hope and
the demand for young people, not only in
Denmark, but all over the world.
>> Just all these kids, they really care
about the environment.
I think we we sort of have to hope
>> because if we give up hope, we also kind
of give up trying.
>> Keep putting pressure on.
>> Yeah.
>> In Denmark, our quest for farming
progress came at the expense of land and
sea.
Now, restoring our forests and reviving
the dead zones won't be easy,
but we have to do all we can to protect
the homes we love.
Because if we don't, the consequences
can be catastrophic.
[music] In Denmark, we're lucky. We have
resources.
But for communities that aren't as
wealthy, how do they protect themselves?
Holy.
It's raining a lot. It's It's the
beginning of the monsoon season.
We are u on the east coast of India and
we're going to go visit a community that
have been relocated from their homes
because of of extreme flooding.
But obviously because of climate change
weather patterns get more extreme. It's
just a recipe for assassin. And that's
what these people have experienced.
>> They just looking for shelter.
>> I know like all of us.
>> Hello.
>> Hi.
>> Pandita and my colleague
>> Jagish. So where are we?
>> This is the uh cyclone shelter prepared
by government for the community.
>> So basically if a cyclone hits
>> Yes.
>> This is for the whole community to then
come and Yeah.
>> And this this building will last. This
is strong.
>> Yeah.
>> Is there a way to go and visit with some
people who were relocated?
>> Yes. Yes. We we can meet them.
We are now at the uh Bapatia village
at uh 12 km far from the coast.
There are 719 families who relocated
here. They suffered a lot because of
super cyclones, rising sea levels. So
they are relocated here because they are
coastal villages completely devastated.
They had to start a new life completely.
>> A third of India's coastline is severely
threatened by erosion. Since 1990, about
100 square miles of land have been lost
to the sea.
And there's a reason damage from extreme
weather is hitting even harder.
>> Hello.
Okay.
Does he miss his home?
[snorts]
Clearly, it's tough having to relocate
being like a in a way a climate refugee
in your own country and now you've been
[music] relocated here. What does this
community need?
In just over a century, India has lost
40% of its mangro forests
cleared to make way for villages, farms,
and towns.
like we did in Denmark a century ago.
But here the story is more complex.
The very communities that cut down the
mangroves
now face even stronger storms because of
climate change.
So how can we prevent more relocations?
>> So how old is this nursery?
It's around 3 years.
>> And you make how many samplings?
>> 30,000 saplings right now.
>> Mangrove is a natural protection between
the coast and the land and it reduce the
soil erosion.
>> These are the roots. It will bind the
soil.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I can see that. So they hold
on. So it's like a it's like a whole
structure where they
>> Yeah. Yeah,
>> it's like a building like a building
that's that's creating its own support
structure.
>> Yeah.
>> And then of course the soil gets stuck
in here.
>> And this is called also steel root.
>> So these are two uh local men they are
working with in our project.
>> Okay. So
>> they are spreading the awareness about
the manu.
>> Are you from this area?
We spoke to some other members of the
community and they were talking about
how younger people choose to move away.
Did you ever consider that yourself?
This is the grownup mangro age old
mangro.
Last year one cyclone came dana and due
to the mangro the effect of that cyclone
was very less.
>> We see that the biodiversity is is
Yeah, that is the beauty of this mangro
forest.
>> There's a crocodile here.
>> Oh yes.
>> Oh my god.
>> Holy.
He's huge.
>> Oh, now he's staring at me.
>> If we stop too long, the crocodile may
come at us.
>> Okay, forget it. on the [laughter]
>> So we're almost here.
>> Those men and women we you are seeing
that they are working at the field.
>> Okay.
>> They are planting now.
Okay.
>> So this bank projects how big is this
project? So around 450 hectares we have
completed the plantation of mangro.
>> It's massive scale.
>> Can I try?
>> Okay.
>> All right. Okay.
>> Oh my god.
>> It's very hard.
>> I'm just an amateur.
That's enough.
Okay, you better do it.
>> Well, at least now you got a a
professional to do it.
>> That's the beauty.
>> Oh, it's ready to go.
>> And then just Okay.
>> Wow. It's very clay like this this soil.
Is that good?
>> Yeah.
Why do you work here? What does the
mangro mean to you?
>> And why? How?
How does it feel to see what you planted
now growing into a strong powerful mag?
Thank you so much for talking to me and
uh it's a very very important job you
do.
Thank you.
>> No
in this particular area we have planted
more than 65,500
plants.
>> So this will definitely help uh in
future because after a super cyclone or
after a disaster flooding we have to
reconstruct everything again.
>> Yeah. So the impact on the planet, the
impact on the fusel is much more higher
than the cost of planting man groups.
>> So what did you [music] think of what
you learned here?
>> It's great. It's it's all about finding
a way to protect [music] these coastal
areas is using what's already here,
what's already, you know, known [music]
to work, which is the mangroves, and
also uh give them agency in [music] in
protecting uh their homes.
[music]
It's great if we get a second chance to
undo serious environmental damage.
However, we cannot stop economic
progress.
So, how do we move forward, protect our
homes, and [music] raise our standards
of living?
This is the new road. So, we're going to
see a lot of these big [music] trucks
coming in and out.
The Amazon, a rainforest covering more
than 2.3 million square miles, is one of
the last places on Earth where many
still live without roads or electricity.
But that is increasingly changing.
>> So now we are on the ashwar [music]
land. They are one of the indigenous
people.
It's a huge territory.
>> In a place so isolated, roads promise
access to economic growth, healthcare,
and education, especially for indigenous
[music] communities.
>> Nanu will tell you about it. He's one of
the leaders.
But we're going to stop just going by
this next machine.
Nico
to meet you.
>> Let's go over here.
>> I want to say thank you so much for
meeting us. I'm really grateful for
allowing us to come.
So, there's a new road being built.
>> So, this is a a wish from the local
people. It is. But once we get to the
river, they are completely against. So
they're trying to stop
>> the road to be built there.
>> But why? It's a road that makes it
easier for people living here. What's
What's the problem?
So destroying the ecosystem, the the the
unity of the people and the culture of
the people.
>> Yes, absolutely.
>> Okay, maybe we should keep going because
I I I want to talk to you when we are
not surrounded by massive trucks.
Foreos.
[music]
Let's go and have a look at the drone
shot.
>> So, do you want to go?
>> You want to go up?
>> Mhm. Yes.
When all this locking happens, does it
benefit the people that live here? Do
they get financial wealth?
>> The companies that actually sell the
wood abroad, those are the people that
benefit the most.
Have you seen anywhere in the Amazon
where a road has has helped the local
community?
>> No.
Oh, okay. So, they somebody's watching.
Someone's not watching us. Okay. So, we
should go.
>> All right.
>> He's saying there's some potential
danger being here.
>> Yeah.
>> I see people carrying guns.
>> Deforestation is the biggest threat to
Ecuador's biodiversity.
Roads make it possible.
In the Amazon, 95% of deforestation
happens within just a few miles of a
road.
After 140 miles, this is where the wind
ends
for now.
I absolutely understand why
they don't want the road to come into
their territory. But then the question
is how do you create a better future for
them without uh having to compromise too
much?
[laughter]
that
resistant
[music]
forless
alternativ.
[music]
>> Welcome to the rainforest.
It's a little a little wet.
Yeah.
>> Give me that one. I'll take Yeah, that's
it. Thank you. Well, I uh I chose to go
in the uh the boat with no uh cover
because
it wasn't going to rain. [music]
About 150 people live in Charmensa.
[music] In recent years, the community
has worked to move away from oil and gas
for its energy needs.
[music]
Fore
the realism.
in Rio.
Nanu and the community have partnered
with a team of engineers from Kito to
help improve river access for everyone.
How excited are you about this engine?
Are you the creator of this? Did you
guys make this?
>> Uh, yes. Yes. Yes. We are the the team.
>> And what's unique about this compared to
the old version?
>> With the old version, we have plenty of
improvements.
They're like, "This is not good enough."
[laughter] Come back. Okay. But he
hasn't been on a boat before.
>> This is a big moment then.
>> Yeah, it is a big moment.
>> Are you nervous?
>> If you went to hell.
>> Oh, absolutely.
>> Yes.
[music]
Okay.
The batteries.
>> Yeah. Yeah. They are going to bring the
batteries now and we're ready to go once
[music] we connect.
And we're ready to go.
>> Here we go.
>> Let's hope it starts. [music]
[applause]
How do you feel about this?
[music]
>> Well, that's good.
How was that?
>> Let's Let's go see.
>> Are you happy with the boat? Super
transport.
>> [music]
>> It's incredible the difference in sound.
So in 5 years time
this engine will be everywhere.
Yeah. Yeah.
Wow.
What a beautiful nice and smooth ride.
Well done.
This can go for an hour, right? Yes.
When can you get enough power so that
you can go do the trip that we did
yesterday?
Okay. Okay. Well, that's great.
By keeping the roads out, Nanu and his
people are trying to protect the
rainforest and their way of life. And
their efforts are already paying off.
>> All right. So,
>> they're looking at videos that they
[music] caught today from the hidden
cameras.
>> [music]
>> This is
>> Wow,
that's beautiful.
I think it's great. You're connecting
the new technological world with a world
that has lived for for thousands of
years. [music]
>> [music]
>> It's very impressive.
[music]
>> Big boat, huh?
>> Yeah.
I just [music] swallowed a bug.
Okay, it's it's perfect timing. We show
you the difference between gas powered
and electric.
Oh my god.
I need you.
Wow,
it's so beautiful.
>> [music]
>> It's unbelievable to think that these
trees are being [music] taken down.
[music]
>> [cough]
>> They suck swimming.
Sure.
>> I sit like this.
Smells so good.
Smells really good. Like really
there's something about trees that are
just magical.
Now this is faithful praise.
We've been able [music] to connect
because we're all in this together.
Now for us coming here is it's
completely mind-blowing.
Watch out. I'm going to jump.
>> Yeah.
Helto CLA.
[music]
It's super important. [music]
that
[music]
>> [music]
>> The name was Gavir.
[singing and music]
It so th
[singing]
[music]
something.